---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*The colon*

The colon plays host to over four hundred species of bacteria. These microcreatures have far-reaching effects on total body healthy. Our lifestyle and what we eat affects their ability to keep us healthy.

p.10

You may be surprised to learn that the primary function of the colon is to absorb water and salt. A slushy mix of partially digested food from the stomach, called chyme, wends its way though the small intestine and eventually arrives are the colon. By this point most of the vitamins, minerals, fats, carbohydrates, and proteins have been broken drown and absorbed in the small intestine and are on their way to being metabolized. However, vital nutrients remain in the chyme that can only be broken down and utilized by the colon. The chyme moves through the colon at about two inches (five centimeters) per hour. The slow pace ensures that almost of the remaining nutritional value is absorbed.
The colon wall, if ironed out, has a big surface area of approximately sixty-six feet (two-thousand centimeters), the size of an eleven-by-six foot rug. this is design to maximize water and electrolyte absorption, every bit of which is soaked up by the colon walls except that which passes out though the colon as stool. The functions of the electrolytes, which include sodium, potassium, and chloride, are to regulate hydration, nerve and muscle function, blood pH and more. As the colon absorbs water via a complex process involving sodium, potassium and — believe it or not — electricity, chyme solidifies into feces. Diarrhea is the result of a portion of water not being absorbed: thus the loose, watery stools.

p.11