---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*The microbiota*

Imagine an island city with neighborhoods populated by people from various cultures, backgrounds, talents, and skills — like Manhattan. Imagine now that your body is that island and the inhabitants are the microbes that live on and in it. Basically that is the microbiome. The human body contains trillions of microbial creatures that are not human, but are microbial, and these diverse, interdependent communities of microbes live on our skin, feet, lungs, ears, scalp, gastrointestinal tract (GIT), and mouth. We are the landlords and these creatures are our tenants. They pay rent by helping metabolize foods we eat, manufacturing chemicals that reduce inflammation, detoxifying toxins, promoting healing, and fighting off pathogens. Pathogens are biological agents like bacteria and viruses that can make us sick.

The term "microbiome" includes not only microbes, but the entire collection of genes found within microbes. Scientists believe that our microbiomes, which include different kinds of microbes including bacteria, protists, and fungi, may be the backbone of our very existence.

p.14


Newborn babies encounter microbes for the first time during birth. As the baby is being born, it is coated with microbes from the mother's birth canal. Babies that are born by Caesarean section first encounter microbes from the mother's skin. Babies come in contact with more microbes from other people who touch, carry, and cuddle them. Another early source of microbes is breast milk. As babies grow more mobile and begin to explore the world, they encounter both environment microbes (like those that live in soil and water), and microbes that have been shed by other people, pets, and plants. They also ingest microbes from food. As we grow up our microbiomes adjust to what we eat and even where we live.

[...]

Research show that people who grow up on farms, live in or near green spaces, whether it's a park, forest, seaside, mountains, or jungles, have fewer diseases including heart disease, allergies, asthma, and mental illnesses like depression. The reason is that they are exposed to a greater variety of microbes, plants, and animals (called biodiversity), nurturing a more diverse microbiome. A diverse microbiome is a healthy microbiome. As in any balanced society, the more varied the population, the healthier the communities. Scientist believe that one reason there is a rise in immune dysfunction, inflammatory diseases, and autoimmune diseases is the urban environments in which kids and adults live; they have higher exposures to chemicals and limited exposure to nature's microbes. The theory that the shift to living in a less biodiverse world is reflected in the world of the human microbiome, make it less diverse and thus vulnerable to infection and disease.

p.15

The role of the microbiome is multifaceted. The healthy microbes help digest and retrieve energy from foods and create anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer compounds, all while fighting off invading pathogens like viruses. A healthy gut keeps unwanted microbes from entering into the rest of the body and boosts total body immunity.

p.16
