---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*The brain-gut axis*

The GIT is lined with some one hundred million neurons that act as radar centers to register what is going on inside and outside the body. The radar centers are nerve, immune, and endocrine (hormonal) cells. They send informational and chemical signals to organs and glands all over the body. These signals influence hunger, satiety, digestion, muscle function, immune system, and emotions. It is important to note that the microbiota in the gut influence how well the radar centers work.
The microbes and the brain communicate by sending text messages to each other. But instead of using their smartphones they use chemicals to send the messages. This is called the gut-brain axis. The microbes produce hundreds of neurochemicals that get sent to the brain in order to regulate mental and physiological processes such as learning, memory, and mood. For example, gut bacteria manufacture about 95 percent of the body's supply of serotonin, which influences both mood and GI activity. Disruptions in the ability of the brain and gut to communicate have been associated with psychiatric symptoms such as anxiety and GI disorders like irritable bowel syndrome. Because the gut-brain axis is like an intimate, on-going discussion, many believe that certain mental illnesses may be treating by manipulating that gut-brain conversation — by altering the gut microbiome. The way to a healthier mind and brain may just be through the "stomach".

p.17