---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*Gluten*

Gluten is a protein found in grains such as wheat — any kind, including semolina, durum, whole, and refined — its relatives such as spelt, faro, barley, and rye. Gluten is what gives bread its elastic texture and structure. Dr. Fasano's research has found that gluten, which is a combination of two proteins called gliadins and glutenins, is indigestible in humans. The body sees these undigested particles as an enemy that needs to be destroyed, and this stimulates an immune response. In some *genetically susceptible* people, like those who develop celiac disease, gluten can trigger an aggressive immune response in the gut, resulting in inflammation, dysfunction, and gut microbiomic imbalance. For the rest of us, while we still cannot fully digest gluten, the immune response is not nearly as intense or damaging. Our bodies engage daily in a war with all kinds af substances, such as bacteria and viruses, but rarely do we lose this battle. Many of us eat gluten daily and our bodies manage this intestinal conflict quite well with no repercussions. We drink alcohol, which is technically poisonous to the body; We encounter all kinds of germs and toxins every day, which is why our bodies have highly complex, multi-leveled defense systems. Thus, saying gluten is a universal poison is like saying we should all stop breathing because there are airborne pathogens that can make us sick: a bit of truth mixed with a lot of sensationalism.

p.29