---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

Bile acids are substances made in our liver to help the digestion of the fats that we eat. Bile acids are made from cholesterol (which is also made in the liver) and transported to your nearby gallbladder. The gallbladder's job is to serve as a holding tank for bile. When you eat food that has fat in it, whether it's a peanut butter sandwich or potato chips, the gallbladder contracts and releases bile acids into the intestine to break down globules of fat int o smaller globs for easier absorption. Being a very green organism, your body reabsorbs and recycles what is left of the bile back to the liver. One reason eating lots of fiber helps lower cholesterol is simply that the fiber binds the bile in the intestine and carries it out of the body. The liver then has to make new bile using the available pool of cholesterol, thus lowering the cholesterol content in the body.

High levels of bile aids caused by diet, genetics, or illness can lead to cancer, diabetes, and other diseases. The body keeps very tight control over the amount of bile acids produced in order to prevent the buildup of toxic substances. It's only when these fine levels of control are breached that bile acids become associated with disease. This violation of the control mechanism can occur through dietary means — eg. high fat diets — where excessive levels of bile acids are produced and converted (via the bacterial flora) to damaging deoxycholic acid (DCA), which at high levels can cause cancer. A plant-based diet can make a big difference in reducing the production and amount of DCA and other secondary bile acids. The fiber alone helps manage the amount of bile acids in the body.

p.30