---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

"Spike in harm to liver is tied to dietary aids!". This was the headline splashed across *The New York Times* in December 2013. The article chronicles Christopher Herrera, a seventeen-year-old teen who, when he walked into a Texas emergency room, was bright yellow: a sure sign that something was seriously wrong with his liver. Christopher had been taking an over-the-counter green-tea-extract fat-burning supplement and was suffering from acute liver injury. The liver damage was so severe he was put on a transplant list. Dietary supplements account for nearly twenty percent of drug-related liver injuries that turn up in hospitals. There are multiple reports from emergency rooms of patients with liver, kidney, or heart failure, and some even die from taking bodybuilding, sexual enhancement, extreme energy, weight loss, and detoxing products. Experts say there are likely many more cases that go unreported and untreated. Consumers believe that "all natural" products are safe. But anything, even if it is "all natural" like the green-tea extract in Christopher's supplement, can become a poison in concentrated forms.

What's scary is that consumers are buying products they think are safe, but they have been laced with hazardous, banned, or pharmaceutical-grade substances like steroids, hormones, diuretics, and amphetamines. Examples of Undeclared, Unsafe, or Banned Substances or Drugs found in over-the-counter products:

* sibutramine: appetite suppressant associated with increased risk of heart attack and stroke
* phenolphthalein: a suspected cancer-causing agent
* phenytoin: a prescription-only anti-seizure medication
* fenproporex: a controlled substance similar to amphetamines that can cause arrhythmia (a disorder of your heart rate or rhythm) and possible sudden death

In 2014 alone, the FDA found more than thirty products, including teas, pills, and powders, that contained the banned drug sibutramine. Sibutramine, an appetite suppressant, is a controlled substance that was removed from the market in October of 2010 because it is known to substantially increase blood pressure and may present a significant risk for patients with a history of coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, or stroke. These products may also interact in life-threatening ways with other medications.

p.57-58

What to avoid: Products that claim to flush, cleanse, detoxify, or renew the liver, lungs, kidneys, or any other organ.

These herbs have been shown to cause liver toxicity and can be found in "cleansing" or "detoxing" supplements, teas, and other products:

* Pennyroyal
* Glycyrrhizin
* Comfrey
* Cascara
* Yohimbe
* Kamishoyosan
* Kava
* Chaparral
* Skullcap

 A review in the *Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology* includes these supplements as having toxic effects on kidneys:

* Cat's Claw
* Chromium
* Germasium
* l-lysine
* Willow Bark
* Yellow oleander
* Chaparral
* Creatine
* Hydrazine
* Thunder god vine
* Wormwood oil
* Yohimbe

Caffeine in normal amounts, as in coffee or tea, is safe for most people. Too much caffeine can make you feel jittery or anxious and make sleeping difficult. Detox and cleansing products may contain caffeine to amplify laxative effects or give an artificial energy boost. You may not know how much caffeine is in a product because the mount is often not listen.

Keep an eye out for these caffeine-containing ingredients:

* Yerba mate
* Guarana
* Caffeine
* Coffee
* Senna
* Cascaras sagrada
* Mate
* Green tea extract
* Kola nut
* Laxative effects
* Aloe
* Psyllium

p.62-63