---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*The liver*

If you really want to detoxify and cleanse your body, then focusing on a healthy liver is the place to start. Your liver performs hundreds of essential functions every second of every day, including detoxifying toxins from alcohol, medications, and metabolic byproducts like ammonia. It makes important chemicals, manufactures cholesterol and bile, stores vitamins and minerals, filters and cleans the blood stream of pathogens, contaminants, and other harmful substances, metabolizes nutrients, and regulates immunity.

The liver produces a family of proteins called metallothioneins. Metallothioneins neutralize harmful metals like lead, cadmium, and mercury to prepare for their elimination from the body. The liver is a highly efficient bacterial bounty hunter. Within 0.01 seconds of unwelcome bacteria reaching special liver cells called Kupffer cells, their are trapped, incapacitated, and eventually destroyed. Bam! You are not going to get that kind of pathogen purge from juice cleanses, colonics, or detox teas. Nothing can compare to the body's brilliant and staggering ability to keep you healthy.

*Fat*

Eating less fat and being sure to eat the right kind of fat can help optimize liver performance. Unsaturated fats, those that are liquid at room temperature such as olive, canola, peanut, grapeseed, and flax seed oils help keep the liver healthy. Scientists have not pinpointed exactly why unsaturated fats are so liver-friendly. It may be linked with the way the liver processes them. Unsaturated fats reduce the glomming of fat onto organs like the liver and pancreas, and they reduce weight gain. They play key roles in reducing inflammation and lowering cholesterol and triglycerides. Whereas saturated fat, which is solid at room temperature (like butter, lard, bacon, and dairy fats), increases inflammation and promotes weight gain. Saturated fats may cause excess fat to accumulate around the liver. If the liver is wrapped in a blanket of fat, its essential functions will be impaired. Saturated fat may also increase the storage of visceral fat. You can't see or pinch visceral fat because it lives deep in your belly under your abdominal muscles. Both an excess of visceral fat and a fatty liver are linked with heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and others diseases.

*Cruciferous vegetables*

They detofixy by upregulating detoxification enzymes, prevent oxidative cell & DNA damage and are chemoprotective against numerous types of cancer.

* Broccoli
* Cauliflower
* cabbage
* Brussels sprouts
* Horseradish
* Watercress
* Turnips
* Radish
* Kale

*Apiaceous vegetables*

They contain organic compounds called furanocoumarins. In liver cells furanocoumarins from apiaceous vegetables help inhibit an enzyme called cytochrone P450 1A2, which activates several procarcinogens. A procarcinogen is a substance that can be turned into a cancer-causing chemical in the body.

* Carrots
* Parsnips
* Dill
* Fennel
* Celery

*Alcohol*

Alcohol is a major factor in liver disease, so limiting alcohol consumption is a big step toward supporting a healthy liver. Alcohol has been the most frequently abused drug for centuries, but it was not until the 1960s that is was recognized as a direct hepototoxin (liver poison). Alcohol and one of its metabolic byproducts, acetaldehyde, are toxic — hence the word "in-toxicated". That's why drinking too much alcohol makes you drunk and hungover. The liver uses a lot of energy to quickly metabolize alcohol and neutralize its poisonous effect. Overtime excessive drinking can cause cirrhosis, pancreatitis, and fatty liver disease as well as liver, colorectal, mouth, and throat cancer. Drinking less alcohol means less toxic substances for your liver to handle.

*A Cleaner Diet*

A cleaner diet means ingesting fewer chemicals for your liver to have to neutralize. You can consume fewer chemicals by eating less processed, junk and fast foods and avoiding unnecessary supplements, over-the-counter (OTC) drugs, or medications. Whether it is vitamins, herbs, or aspirin, the liver is the organ that will be breaking down and metabolizing them.

*Fat soluble micronutrient*

You can overdose with vitamins, minerals, and other "natural" supplements too. High doses of important vitamins like vitamins D and A, and minerals like iron, can lead to liver injury and other serious health problems. It is best to get the bulk of your vitamins and minerals from food.

*Sugar*

Sugar, in the forms of sucrose, honey, maple syrup, etc, is not nearly as bad for you as you think. Even water, when consumed in large amounts, can be toxic. Unlike alcohol, which is toxic all the time, sugar is not toxic when consumed in reasonable amounts, and it is essential for our survival. We need to have carbohydrates and sugar in our diets to fuel our lives — just a lot less, and preferably from foods such as fruits, vegetables, legumes, and whole grains. The easiest thing you can do is to avoid highly processed foods that have added fructose, high fructose corn syrup, and an excess of added sugars.

p.64-69