---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*The kidneys*

The kidney's primary jobs are to maintain the body's water and blood volume, balance the pH of the whole body and filter all the blood. We have two kidneys, and each one contains between one to two million nephrons. These tiny nephrons are the functional filters of the kidney. The nephron filtration system removes toxic wastes and knows how much water and which substances, like amino acids, sodium, and potassium, to keep in the body and recycle. The entire volume of blood in the body is filtered, cleansed, and detoxified by the kidneys about sixty times a day.
One of the best ways to keep your kidneys happily cleansing your body is by drinking plenty of water and fluids. This includes fluids from teas, soups, and juicy fruits and vegetables.

*Protein*

Protein and kidneys are inextricably linked. Proteins are made up of building blocks called amino acids. Amino acids are like Legos, the body can build all kinds of structures with them, depending upon the order in which they are stacked. Like the bin of multi-colored, multi-shaped Legos in the toy chest, the kidneys maintain the bin of amino acids to be sure there are enough to fill the body's constantly changing needs. The kidneys maintain this delicate a balance through the synthesis, breakdown, filtration, reabsorption, and urinary excretion of amino acids and peptides (two amino acids bonded together).

Healthy protein comes primarily from plant sources such as almonds, pistachios, walnuts, quinoa, lentils, kindey, tofu, edamame, veggie burgers, and red, pinto and black beans. Your body can only utilize about twenty to thirty-five grams of protein at a time, so you want to spread your protein throughout the day. This also helps manage appetite, blood sugars, energy, and weight and reduces the risk of age-related sarcopenia (muscle loss).

*High-protein / low carb diet*

The high-protein, no or low carbohydrate fad has taken on a life of its own. High-protein diets are attractive because they are simple, they include foods people like, and initial weight loss happens quickly, even though it is mostly water. The long-term effects of high-protein diets on kidney health are controversial. High-protein diets in people with compromised kidney function may accelerate kidney disease. This is a real concern; of the estimated thirty-one million people in the US living with chronic kidney disease, nine out of ten down't know they have kidney disease. So people who are trying to lose weight or manage diabetes by going on high-protein diets may end up making matters worse by inadvertently stressing out their kidneys.

*Salt*

Your kidneys use sodium as currency to help maintain fluid balance, which is the amount of water in your cells, tissues, and organs. Sodium is essential because, along with potassium, it creates electrical impulses that keep your brain, heart, muscles, and nervous system functioning. Because sodium affects water and blood volume, it also affects blood pressure. Blood pressure has a direct effect on kidney function. It can either cause or be the result of kidney disease.

There are easy ways to keep blood pressure in the range where it's supposed to be. Avoiding processed foods is one. You'd be amazed how much sodium is in some of these foods. Regular cardiovascular exercise, limiting alcohol, and loading up on — you guessed it — plants, all lower blood pressure and boost kidney function.

Most of the sodium in our diets comes from restaurant, deli, and processed foods. The American Heart Association recommends 1500-2300 milligrams of sodium a day. You may not think you are eating too much sodium, but consider this: Just one teaspoon of table salt has about 2400 milligrams of sodium.

*The Diabetes-Kidney Connection*

Diabetes refers to a group of conditions where the body has difficulty managing blood glucose (blood sugar) levels for a variety of reasons. Over time, high levels of blood glucose can damage the small blood vessels of the kidneys and weaken the kidneys' nephrons (filters). When the kidneys' blood vessels and filters are damaged, kidney function worsens.

p.70-76