---
title: the Only Cleanse
author: Samantha Heller
---

*The skin*

Your skin is your first line of defense against the outside world and the largest organ in the body. And, like the rest of your body, your skin needs to be fed. certain foods will bolster the skin's ability to fight disease, detox the body, and slow the process of aging. Skin has to get the vitamins, minerals, amino acids, and fats that it needs to be healthy from the food you eat. Conversely, certain foods and lifestyle choices like smoking or tanning can destroy the skin and damage its ability to protect the body.

When you think of skin as your body's first barrier to invasion, it makes sense that the environment has a significant impact on the health of skin. Skin helps keep our bodies detoxed by acting as a barricade that defends against multiple environmental insults.

* Free radicals, one form of insult, induce or contribute to adverse effects on the skin, including swelling, wrinkling, photoaging, inflammation, autoimmune reactions, hypersensivity, precancerous lesions, and skin cancer. Free radicals are molecules that are desperately looking for a mate and will latch on to inappropriate molecules. When there are too many free radicals, they can damage important cellular components such as DNA or the cell membrane.

* Cigarette smoke, alcohol, pollution, and most importantly sunlight, can damage skin and cause the destruction of collagen fibers, elastin, and skin cells, and they can increase the risk of skin cancers. A primary cause of sunken, wrinkled, scaly skin is inflammation, oxidative stress, and the loss of skin's structural support, flexibility and elasticity.