---
title: How great leaders inspire action
author: Simon Sinek
src: https://www.ted.com/talks/simon_sinek_how_great_leaders_inspire_action
---

How do you explain when others are able to achieve things that seem to defy all the assumptions?
For example: Why is Apple so innovative? And yet, they're just a computer company. They're like everyone else. They have the same access to the same talent, the same agencies, the same consultant, the same media. Then why is it that they seem to have something different? Why is it that Marthin Luther King led the Civil Rights Movement? He wasn't the only man who suffered in pre-civil rights America, and he certainly wasn"t the only great orator of the day. Why him? And why is it that the Wright brothers were able to figure out controlled, powered man flight, when there were certainly other teams who were better qualified, better funded, and they didn't achieve powered man flight — and the Wright brothers beat them to it. There's something else at play here. 

As it turns out, there's a pattern. All the great inspiring leaders and organizations in the world, whether it's Apple or Martin Luther King or the Wright brothers, they all think, act and communicate the exact same way. And it's the complete opposite to everyone else.

Every single person, every single organization on the planet knows what they do, 100%. Some, know how they do it. But very, very few, people or organizations know why they do what they do. And by "why" I don't mean "to make a profit", that's a result. By "why" I mean, what's your purpose? What's your cause? What's your belief? Why dos your organization exist? Why do you get out of bed in the morning? And why should anyone care? As a result, they way we think, we act, the way we communicate is from the outside in: What, How, Why. We go from the clearest thing to the fuzziest thing.

But the inspired leaders and the inspired organizations, regardless of their size, regardless of their industry, all think, act and communicate from the inside out: Why, How, What. For example: If Apple were like everyone else, a marketig message from the might sound like this: "We make great computers, they're beautifully designed, simple to use and user friendly. Wanna to buy one?". Meh. Here's how Apple actually communicates: "Everything we do, we believe in challenging the status quo. We believe in thinking differently. The way we challenge the status quo is by making our products beautifully designed, simple to use and user friendly. We just happen to make great computers. Wanna buy one?" Totally different, right? What it proves to us is that people don't buy what you do, people buy why you do it. If you talk about what you believe, you will attract those who believe what you believe.

But why is it important to attrat those who believe what you believe? Something called the law of diffusion of innovation: the first 2.5% of our population are our innovators, the next 13.5% are our early adopters, the next 34% are our early majority, then comes your late majority, and your laggards. We all sit at various places at various times on this scale but the law of diffusion of innovation tells us is that if you want mass-market success or mass-market acceptance of an idea, you cannot have it until you achieve this tipping point, between of 15% and 18% market penetration. Because the early majority will not try something until someone ele has tried it first. And these guys, the innovators and the early adopters, they're more comfortable making intuitive decisions that are drive by what they believe about the world and not just what product is available. In fact, people will do the things that prove what they believe. People don't buy what you do, people buy why you do it and what you do simply serves as the proof of what you believe.

In the summer of 1963, 250 000 people showed up on the mall in Washington to hear Dr. King speak. They sent out no invitations, and there was no website to check the date. How do you do that? He didn't go around telling people what needed to change in America, he went around and told people what he believed. "I believe, I believe, I believe", he told people. And people who believed what he believed took his cause and they made it their own, and the told people. And some of those people created structures to get the word out to even more people. And lo and behold, 250 000 people showed up on the right day at the right time to hear him speak. How many of them showed up for him? Zero. They showed up for themselves. It's what they believed about America that got them to travel in a bus for eight hours to stand in the sun in Washington in the middle of August. Dr. King believed that there are two types of laws in this world: those that are made by a higher authority and those that are made by men. And not until all the laws that are made by men are consistent with the laws made by the higher authority will we live in a just world. It just so happened that the Civil Rights Movement was the perfect thing to help him bring his cause to life. We followed, not for him, but for ourselves.

And by the way, he gave the "I have a dream" speech, not "I have a plan" speech. Leaders hold a position of power or authority, but those who lead inspire us. Whether they're individuals or organizations, we follow those who lead, not because we have to, but because we want to. We follow those who lead, not for them, but for ouselves. And it's those who start with "why", that have the ability to inspire those around them or find others who inspire them.


